Hi.
And welcome back.
And now we are going to deal with the first example of recursion and that is how to compute the factorial
of a number.
So we have already seen that F(N) for factorial can be written as
N x F(N-1).
And for example, if we have 5!, it can be written as 5 x 4!.
And we discussed when we are going to solve a recursive problem, we will figure out two cases.
One is a base case.
And second, the recursive case.
Okay.
So in the base case I know when the value N is equal to zero, the answer of factorial should be
one.
And in the recursive case I know the formula is nothing but N x F(N-1) .
These are the only two things that we need to know.
The ones we know, these two things we can write the code on.
And.
While After writing the code, I will tell you how the call stack works and why we are getting the right answer.
Okay.
So we will also talk about call stack in recursion and why it is correct.
So let us first dive into the code and then we will see.
So I'm going to make a recursive program for factorial.
So let's say we have a function int factorial.
The return type is integer because the function is going to return an integer.
So we get some value input.
And we have a base case and we also have a recursive case.
So what is going to happen in the base case?
We are going to say, if N is, zero.
Then we know the answer is going to be one.
That's it.
In the recursive case, we know that the given problem F(N) can be written as
N x fact(N-1)
That's it.
And we can say return this answer.
And we are done
Okay.
So this is the complete factorial program and now we are going to test our code.
So maybe take input from the user and then print the factorial of that particular number and.
The build's successful.
So let's run it.
So if I give 5, I get the answer as 120.
If I give 6 the answer is  720, that means it's working perfectly fine.
And now let's also look what happened, actually.
So then your program started.
Okay.
So there is a call stack.
There is a concept of call stack.
So what is call stack, stack is a special memory.
So it's like a container and all the functions that are called there.
They go inside the stack.
So first of all, the main function.
It went into the stack.
And all the local variables like N.
And here we have only one local variable.
So that's defined it.
And let's say we took this value as input so N is defined as five from where we call the fact function
and we tell okay, we have to compute the factorial of any N = 5 So this checks
whether the base case is true so this is not true.
It makes another recursive call okay, you can see it compute the value answer.
So there is a variable answer that is not yet computed.
There it is 5 x something so that something is what that is 4!
So we make another recursive call to the fact total that call gets pushed into the stack where N is four.
And here we also create
another local variable, because answer is a local variable in every call stack that we are going to create
these local variables.
So here the value of answer is 4 x something that something is another function call will return
So N = 3
Here we have answer equal to 3 x something that something is nothing but another function.
Call N = 2, answer = 2 x something that is F(1).
So we make another function call.
And that answer is 1 x 0!.
So we make another function call with N = 0
Now N = 0 we say return one.
So this function actually returns one, it gets removed from the call stack.
So here I will change my colour.
Now we're going to work in the different direction.
Now we have reached the base case.
Okay.
And the base case says you're return 1 to the point from where it was called.
So it was called from here.
So we return a one.
So it becomes answer is 1 x 1, now F(1) is going to return one and you can see return answer
.
Now this statement earlier, what happened is when you were computing 	this answered, this function was
pause at line number 12 and it was waiting for the value of fact(N-1) once it got the value
from fact(N-1) it return the answer that is one into one.
That is one.
This gets removed from the call stack and this answer one is stored here so it is 2 x 1
And this function was waiting for the value of F(1) and now it has got the value because this function
returned to its parent.
This will get removed.
So it will return 2 x 1 that is 2 to 2 will come here.
Similarly, this function was waiting for F(2).
Now that value has arrived and it will return.
6 so 6 will come here.
So it will become 4 x 6 .
That is 24 and it would return 24 here.
It would become 5 x 24.
That is 120.
And this value would come here because main is waiting for this value.
So here you will get an answer of 120.
That's it.
And finally, once your main is also over, this also gets removed from the call stack.
If I talk about how much time it will take, we actually.
Made a call stack of n levels deep.
So we are making N number of calls.
Each call takes constant time.
So the time taken is O(N).
Okay.
Time is O(N)
And what about the space complexity?
Okay.
So if I talk about.
How is this space complexity changing through the entire program?
So initially, you can see there was only one stack frame that increased to two, three, four,
five, six.
So then it came back to again like zero.
So during the point when the base case was hit, the space utilization was maximum and that was equal
to O(N)
Okay.
So in the worst case during this entire execution and this is space and this is time of execution,
at a particular point, the space utilization was maximum.
So we would say the space complexity of this program is also O(N) although we're not taking any
Extra array
But we are using the call stack.
Which takes memory and you can see for maximum depth of N we have created N number of answer variables
each storing a different value.
Okay.
So at a particular point in the program, the space utilization went up to linear.
So we can say both space and time are going to be O(N) for this problem.
And one point you need to remember that all recursive problems will take up extra space.
Okay?
So because it actually takes extra space because of the concept of this implicit stack.
So that's it.
That's all for this lecture.
07:42.607:48.3
And now I hope you understood how recursion actually works for this particular problem.